spec: Add source API v1alpha1 (#3)
fluxcd/source-controller: docs/spec/README.md

# Source Controller Proposal

## Context

The desired state of a cluster is made out of Kubernetes objects, these objects are expressed in `.yaml` format and 
are applied on the cluster by operators running inside the cluster. An operator's role is to fetch the Kubernetes
objects, run transformations on them and reconcile the cluster state with the resulting manifest.

For an operator to acquire the resources that make up the desired state it needs to understand the communication 
protocol and the authentication scheme, verify the authenticity of a source and deal with rate limits and retries.
In the FluxCD organization there are currently two operators that perform such operations. Both Flux and 
Helm Operator connect to Git repositories to fetch Kubernetes objects, they need to maintain an up-to-date mirror 
of one or several repos. Besides Git, Helm Operator needs to connect to Helm repositories hosted on public or 
private HTTPS servers.

## Motivation

Each Flux or Helm Operator instance maintains its own Git repository mirror even if all of them
point to the same source. If the Git repository host becomes unavailable, the cluster state will diverge from the last

> know desired state since the operators will stop the reconciliation due to pull errors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
known desired state since the operators will stop the reconciliation due to pull errors. 
```

Decoupling the Kubernetes objects acquisition from the reconciliation process with an in-cluster 
source manager would make Flux and Helm Operator resilient to outbound connectivity issues and would
simplify the state machine(s) that these controllers operate.

Managing the source operations in a dedicated controller could allow Flux to compose the desire state of a cluster

> from multiple source.

Reviewer: I don't see how it _allows_ this -- it's allowed already, it would just need some work.

Author: Is `enable` a better word than `allows`?

Reviewer: I think the idea you're getting at is that it breaking the source management out would make the job of rewriting Flux to do multiplexing easier. In which case, "enable" is in the right spirit.

Author: I've changed it. Thanks

> Further more the manifests transformation process could be performed by 3rd party tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the manifests transformation process could be performed by 3rd party tools
```

(e.g. kustomize, jk, tanka, cue run by Tekton pipelines or Kubernetes Jobs)

> that would output the final state of the Kubernetes objects into an artifacts repository maintained by the source controller.

Reviewer: I can see it might be useful to have a source which Flux syncs, where the source is populated ex-git by some other process. But this seems like a bit of a swerve from the stated purpose of the controller, which is to keep an up-to-date record of what's in git -- now it's do that, _and_ be a storehouse for arbitrary tarballs. I think some alternatives need to be considered.

Author: I agree, the source controller could just notify other controllers of a source update and is up to them to run the transformations and pipe the result to Flux.

Reviewer: What I would do here is keep the idea, but make this less of a specific suggestion (i.e., remove the statement that the source controller will act as an artifact repository).

Author: 👌

* detect source changes based on update policies (semver)
* fetch resources on-demand and on-a-schedule
* package the fetched resources into a well known format (tar.gz, yaml)
* store the artifacts locally
* make the artifacts addressable by their source identifier (sha, version, ts)
* make the artifacts available in-cluster to interested 3rd parties
* notify interested 3rd parties of source changes and availability (status conditions, events, hooks)

## Impact to Flux

Having a dedicated controller that manages Git repositories defined with Kubernetes custom resources would:

* simplify Flux configuration as fluxd could subscribe to Git sources in-cluster and pull the artifacts
automatically without manual intervention from users to reconfigure and redeploy FLux
* improve the installation experience as users will not have to patch fluxd's deployment to inject
the HTTPS basic auth credentials, change the source URL or other Git and PGP related settings
* enable fluxd to compose the desired state of a cluster from multiple sources by applying all artifacts present in flux namespace
* enable fluxd to apply manifests coming from other sources than Git, e.g. S3 buckets

> * allow fluxd to run under a non-root user as it wouldn't need to shell out to ssh-keygen, git or pgp 

Reviewer: Which of these needs you to be root?
